Appendix ?

(Robert Ashcroft, being Australian uses this spelling standard)

Alternate Reality (AR)

This race is probably the hardest race to understand.  The lack of
factories, mines, defences and the fact you live in orbit are probably
the hardest thing to adjust to.  You will be popular among the mineral
poor races but the War Monger tend to use your orbiting colonies for
target practice.  Not that there is anything new in that, they use
everything for target practice.

If being really different is your thing, and living on the sharp edge     
is where you want to be, then this is  the race for you.  It is not
for the faint of heart but for the tenacious.  The AR will excel at
mining, fast early growth, the capacity to build forever when other
races run out of minerals.  There is a price, you have to plan and
plan carefully.

Advantages

The most obvious advantage is the Alternate Reality do not waste
resources building planetary installations.  That is, they have no
need for planet based factories, mines, planet defences or scanners.
Their world is confined to the very agreeable orbital structure
positioned above their choice worlds.  The orbital provides living
space and a platform for viewing the universe.  Consequentially the
race is also immune to the effects of comet strike, and some mineral
packet attacks assuming that environmental changes are of no
influence.

Note: Building planetary infrastructure is only possible in earlier
versions of stars. Don't waste resources building factories, mines and
planetary defences with these early versions of stars.

As an energy based life form their orbital structure becomes a scanner
with all contributing to the effective scanner range.  Range increases
with population.

The most powerful advantage is that because this race live on orbital
structures they build these with ease.  They gain a permanent but not
accumulative 20% discount on building orbiting structures.  They also
gain from a new type of orbiting structure.  The Death Star hull.
This enables them to approach most races in productive capacity.  It
is also harder to kill this hull design as it can carry more weapons
and armour for the same resource investment that other races would
require.

Remote mining is another large advantage this race has.  They can
remote mine every world that they colonise and every world that is not
occupied by another race.  At their home world the production of
minerals can be impressive and accounts for their real power.  They
will continue to produce material indefinitely because with care they
will never run out of minerals.

The coloniser available to the Alternative Reality also comes with
built in bombing capacity.  Allow them to clear worlds without bombers         
with time and numbers.

Orbital Structures

Orbital Fort:   Allows for a maximum population of 250,000
Space Dock:*    Allows for a maximum population of 500,000
Space Station:  Allows for a maximum population of 1,000,000
Ultra Station:* Allows for a maximum population of 2,000,000
Death Star:     Allows for a maximum population of 3,000,000

* If Improved Starbases is taken, but you do not gain an extra 20%
reduction in building orbital structures.

Race design

The governing factor for the Alternate Reality is the following
resource formula.

Annual resources = Habitability Value x SQRT(Population x Energy Tech
Level / Efficiency Coefficient)

The effective way of driving home the effect of this formula is to  
claim that one colony of 100,000 produces less resource than 4
colonies with 25,000.  Assuming 100% habitability, an energy
technology level of 10 and an efficiency coefficient of 10.  Then a
single colony of 100,000 produce 316 resources, where as, 4 colonies
of 25,000 produce 632 resources.  In this example you loose half of
you productive capacity by having your population in one location.

Now you have to choose.  You will find that a 6% growth rate with all
habitats checked to immune can be equivalent to the standard design
starting point for this race. (Selecting all the habitats to immune is
referred as Tri-immune.)  This is not the case with other races and it
occurs due to the way in which resources are gained by the race.  Also
the fact that the Alternate Realty are the only race that can load up
to the total population of an orbiting structure without loss of
colonists occurring due to the Habitability Factor that reduces
populations for other races.    Races that are have habitat immunity
to the 3 habitat factors have a habitability value of 100% for all
planets.  The effect of this is enhanced in the case of the Alternate
Reality.

The next most popular choice is to select one of the habitats as
immune and adjust the other 2 to narrow off centred ranges.  This has         
a similar effect to choosing all habitat factors as immune.  These
types of race designs tend to have a 1 in 10 through to a 1 in 21
habitable planet chance.  While this may seem poor it is not something
that will cripple the race.  This is because the planet values tend to
be high and are easily improved with the judicious use of colonists.
Also the race gains from being spread out, even if this means
colonising systems that are red (negative habitability factors).

The next factor is the choice for the Efficiency Coefficient that is
applied in the above formula.  Since it is a divisor the lower the
number the higher your total productive efficiency.   Ranges possible
are 7 through 25.  Brave is the player who choses 7 or above 15.  The
typical choice is nearer to 10.

Lesser Racial Traits

Improved Fuel Efficiency (IEF), is a real bonus to the race that must
colonise and spread out quickly, the real gain from this trait is the
Fuel Mizer that will be yours regardless of the selection of No Ram
Scoop Engines trait.  The next bonus is the fuel cost of travel.
These are critical to early development.                                         
                                                      
Advanced Remote Mining (ARM), your options in this regard are limited,
you have no choice but to choose unless you have a style of game that
allows it to be ignored.  The need to produce minerals particularly
Ironium is critical and this gives you a head start. (Note: earlier
versions require a Germanium bias)

Improved Starbases (ISB), again depending on the style of game this
can be a bonus, something worth considering seriously.  The main
reason is for the gaining of space docks and ultra space stations and
certainly a must for lower growth race designs.  It is also a major
enhancement to transporting networks that hide your ships. The main
advantage comes for building of remote miners when you gain the space
dock at construction level 4.

No Ram Scoop Engines (NRSE), if you choose improved fuel efficiency
this will return points to your design with added benefits.  With a
propulsion technology of 11 the universe is yours at warp 10.
Significantly earlier that without.  For a race where internal
commerce and mobile forces are needed something that should not be
ignored.

Low Starting Population (LSP), this trait can be of significant        
advantage.  Even with a 6% growth rate the effects of a reduction of
starting population can be minimised.  This is because of the way the
resources are gained by the Alternate Reality race, but choose this
only if you are having to make up for a deficiency in points.

For the lower growth rate race designs consider Mineral Alchemy (MA)
and Ultimate Recycling (UR).  These can aid such designs.

Generalized Research (GR) can work or hinder, definitely something
that is game style dependent.  If the game is going to skip forward in
multi turn generates of say 100-1000 years then consider it but in the
main it is probably better to ignore it.

Total Terraforming (TT) can in prove habitability only if you are not
choosing a tri-immune race design.  It like Generalised Research can
hinder or help.  The game style that you play in has a bigger impact
on using this trait.

Taking the remaining traits is to be avoided.  No Advanced Scanners
(NAS) can work but it is only recommended to the advanced player.
Cheap Engines (CE) can really hurt the Alternate Reality as it needs
reliable ship movement. Only Basic Remote Mining (ORBM) could be    
considered for special games but usually hurts the Alternate Reality.
Bleeding Edge Technology (BET) makes your most effective ship designs
more expensive in the late game.  Regenerating Shields (RS) offers
nothing for a race that needs all the defence it can muster.

Research

The two most important factors for the Alternate Reality are the cost
of Energy and Construction technology.  Energy technology levels
directly impact the resources the race gets to have for production.
Construction determines the availability of the various orbital
structures that the race will live in.  Consequentially you should
choose the cheapest option for both of these research categories.
That is Costs 50% less.

Weapons are important, but you have also got a competing need for
propulsion.  If possible go for costs 50% less or normal.  If you have
taken the Improved Fuel Efficiency lesser trait then propulsion could
be set to costs 75% extra as the research target is propulsion level
11 for warp 10.

Electrical and Biotechnology research is usually expensive to get the     
point value for the race design to a non-negative value.  Due to
Biotechnology being set to costs 75%, the designs tend to ignore total
terraforming.

All 'Costs 75%' research fields start at tech 4, if you have the
points and propulsion is costs 75% extra and you have chosen Improved
Fuel Efficiency then take it.  Your ships have the Fuel Mizer as
standard and it will improve initial growth.

Remaining points

If you have them your only real choices are Surface minerals or
Improved mineral concentrations. Surface minerals gives you a larger
stock pile to begin with, and it can kick start initial growth.

Strategy

Here is where it all happens for the Alternate Reality race.  Getting
it wrong after race design flaws can see this race relegated to
producer of minerals or extinction.  The key to the success of the
Alternate Reality is to expand as fast as possible in a way that
allows you to defend what you claim.

This race suffers a major problem.  Loss of the orbital results in the
loss of the system and colonists.  It is the only race that you cannot
find out the population statistics for.  Other races are not so easily
identified.  This knowledge in the hands of aggressive players will
spell dangers for your new empire but this problem can be easily
countered.  For the first 50 turns your race will win the technology
war, and maybe the game.

To do this you have to explore quickly and aggressively colonise the
good worlds you find.  You are aiming to have your important colonies
established by 2420 to 2430 at the very latest.  If you are slower
than this your cause will be lost.  This means you colonise everything
you can reach with 3-5 turns of movement with 2200 colonists per
world.  You are aiming for at least 31 systems before 2425.

So how to do it?  First set the build queue to build 1 Pinta, 1
Smaugarian Peeping Tom alternatively for the entire capacity of the
build queue (about 20 sets of colonist fleets). Set your research tax
to 0%, Don't worry about this as you will still achieve an energy tech
level of 5 within 5 turns, 10 by 2408.
                                             
first.  If you have a war monger for a neighbour, and they will not be
friends then weapon 6 is an absolute must.  No point in building an
empire if you are going to loose it to War Monger scouts.  Beta
torpedoes on an orbital will swing the balance to your favour.

If you can, colonise every world within a 3 or 5 turn reach of your
home world.  This will allow you to do 2 things, give you a research
base level that can help early game, and space docks or starbases that
will enhance your transport network.  A side effect is that it will
prevent other's from colonising worlds that can be used as a base to
attack.  Again you are buying time.  The side effect is that you will
gain technology faster as the discovery rate is dependent on colonies
established.  This will enhance your initial research efforts and with
fortune on your side, explode your energy research.

Within the first 30 turns you are looking to establish an empire and
shipping network, after this you are concentrating on defences, but
this does not mean ignoring defence.  With this in mind consider that
a torpedo can go a long way.

Defending the empire

By 2420 you should have achieved Energy 10, Construction 4, and
Weapons 10, with Weapons 12 and Construction 12 in the offing by
2430-2435.   So what do you build to defend yourself?  Ships or
Orbital structures.  Well it is a difficult choice but some things to
make it easier.  Alternate Reality get a 20% discount for orbital
structures.  This factor is decisive in the choice.  Sure ships can
aid but effective orbital structures are more efficient in using your
valuable resource allocation.

The golden rule it to fire first and fire further than your opponent
does.  Torpedoes do both.  You gain a +1 range to torpedoes and
missiles housed in the orbital structures.  You do not gain this when
you use ships.  Ships will take 3-4 turns to get into range to fire
this means you get 3-4 shots before they become a problem.  Use the
advantage you have.

Orbital structure designs to consider.

Orbital Fort, 250 points of Armour and Shields, 6 computers and 4-16
Delta torpedoes or Jihad missiles
Space Station, 800 points of Armour and Shields, 8 computers and 8-16
Delta torpedoes or Jihad missiles   
Ultra Station, 2000 points of armour and shields, 12 computers and 16
Jihad missiles
Death Star, 3000 points of armour and shields, 24 computers and 32
Jihad missiles.

All of the above are relatively cheap to produce and effective in
their use of minerals and resources.  Each design in progression uses
approximately double the resources of its predecessor, and with care
in producing can more than easily account with most threats until
about 2450 when your neighbours will start to gain the production
edge.

How does this compare with ships?  The answer to this question is
dependent on the designs.  You are not going to be able to get the
initiative advantage that the orbital will have.   You gain mobile
defence.   Compare the costs and then decide.

Lets assume that you have Construction 13 to make this easier.  Your
choices in ship defence are the Freighter, Destroyer, Cruiser and
Battle ship.  For this discussion freighter like hulls Galleon and
Privateer are ignored.  Further lets assume that you have Jihads and
battle computers.  In the case of the orbital structures assume 16         
Jihads and a bit of armour and shields as indicated above. (Note:
numbers may be slightly out due to miniaturisation effects, in this
case costs given may be higher.)

Hull                    Ir      Bo      Ge      Res     Comment

Orbital Fort    111     40      47      71
Space Station   154     64      142     272
Ultra Station   153     67      185     317
Death Star              298     126     328     796

Frigate         52      19      14      24      6 to equal an Orbital
fort
Destroyer               56      19      21      34      6 to equal an
Orbital fort
Cruiser         115     38      41      73      3 to equal an Orbital
fort
Battleship              326     108     120     230     1 to equal an
Space Station

In all cases the orbital hulls have the superior initiative and range,
they will have 2 rounds of fire.  The ships have no armour beyond the
basics of the hull.  Definitely something that will result in the
destruction of the ships providing no large numbers of ships.

The orbital structures can be easily augmented with more missiles to
increase fire power at a cost of  112 kton Ironium, 38 kton Boranium,
35 kton Germanium and 38 Resources per stack of 16 Jihad missiles.
This is discounted to the ship equivalent costs of the same stack on
ships being 256 kton Ironium, 96 kton Boranium, 64 kton Germanium and
96 Resources.  Now if you want to waste the resources in building a
stack of ships when you can get 2 missile stacks of 16 for the same
investment then fine.

When the game turns to more powerful weapons near 2450 you will have
to augment your orbital defence with ships.  Generally you will find
that investment in orbital defence is more effective to ship based
defence.  But this changes when you maxout on orbital defences you
need to build ships later in the game, and they need to fire first and
destroy.  In the early turns you only need ships to defend transports
and attacks on transports, this is not something that is common in the
early turns of a game.

The only thing to add to the ship discussion is the construction of        
mine fields.  Scouts with mine layers do an excellent job.  Frigates
with mines and scanners do a bit better, but Nubians are the final
goal.

The only thing that will enhance your defence is the gaining of
stargates.  The first achieved will be the 100/250 gate.  Adding this
to an orbital will cost 10 kton Ironium, 4 kton Boranium, 4 kton
Germanium and 40 resource points.  The immediate benefit is that you
shrink transport cycles by at least 1/2.  This greatly aids
everything.  Development and defence are boosted.

A 300/500 gate is probably the preferred choice but not likely much
before 2440.  It will add 29 kton Ironium, 7 kton Boranium, 8
Germanium and 230 resources to the cost of an orbital.  The advantage
gained is that heavier ships can be moved between systems to augment
defence.

Summary

The Alternate Reality is definitely the race for those who want a
challenge.  They are powerful early and late game but in the middle
real care is required to keep them running.  They can easily supply
the mineral needs of their own empire and 5 besides.  This alone
allows them to build ships when other races begin to suffer minerals
shortages.  As an ally they boost the overall efficiency.  For a War
Monger they represent an easy target, more so than any other race.  If
basic War Monger nature is held in check, the boost to the War Monger
by AR minerals supply can be devastating on the opposition.  All in
all a valuable ally but they tend to remember long after, the
destruction of their colonies.



                                   
         
                                          